# Bower

## Timings

This lesson should take between 45 and 60 minutes to complete.

## Pre-requisites

* Inline and External Javascript
* Must have node installed

## This lesson covers

* Package managers
* Installation
* The manifest and git
* installing packages

We've started to use more frameworks and plugins in our code now. jQuery is a good example. As we continue our code will involve more of this piecing together of other people's code. So far we've used either external links to get this code or we've made a copy of the file ourselves.

These two methods have some drawbacks. It becomes very hard to make sure you have the latest version of all your packages. If you use external links it also means relying on someone elses server which can be a dangerous thing on a production site.

Package managers solve these problems for us by keeping a list of all the files we need ( called a manifest ) and installing and updating them for us.

Let's install bower and have a look at how we can install new packages with it.


## Installation

Bower is installed with the node packager manager. If you haven't already installed node head over to the node website and grab the installer now.

Installing bower is easy. And yes, we ***are*** using one package manager to install another. Open a terminal and type the following:

```javascript
npm install -g bower
```

The -g means it will be installed globally ( not just for this project ). Which means we only have to do this once.

> NOTE : Installing is always a pain. Leave some good time to do this.

You can test your installation by typing bower. You should see the bower manual and all the commands you can run.

```bash
$ bower

Usage:

    bower <command> [<args>] [<options>]
Commands:

    cache                   Manage bower cache
    help                    Display help information about Bower
    home                    Opens a package homepage into your favorite browser
    info                    Info of a particular package
    init                    Interactively create a bower.json file
    install                 Install a package locally
    link                    Symlink a package folder
    list                    List local packages - and possible updates
    login                   Authenticate with GitHub and store credentials
    lookup                  Look up a package URL by name
    prune                   Removes local extraneous packages
    register                Register a package
    search                  Search for a package by name
    update                  Update a local package
    uninstall               Remove a local package
    unregister              Remove a package from the registry
    version                 Bump a package version
Options:

    -f, --force             Makes various commands more forceful
    -j, --json              Output consumable JSON
    -l, --loglevel          What level of logs to report
    -o, --offline           Do not hit the network
    -q, --quiet             Only output important information
    -s, --silent            Do not output anything, besides errors
    -V, --verbose           Makes output more verbose
    --allow-root            Allows running commands as root
    -v, --version           Output Bower version
    --no-color              Disable colors
See 'bower help <command>' for more information on a specific command.
```

## The manifest and git

Open up the starter code and have a look at the files. You should see a file called bower.json. This is the bower manifest. It is a list of all the packages that we have previously said we need for our project. I created this one for you.

Open it up in your editor. The bower.json is, surprisingly enough, written in JSON. So you should be able to understand the structure. Luckily for us we very rarely write to the file ourselves. It is generated by bower.

```javascript
{
  "name": "starter-code",
  "homepage": "https://github.com/steveyblam/Sparta",
  "authors": [
    "Stephen Reid <steveyblam@hotmail.co.uk>"
  ],
  "description": "",
  "main": "",
  "license": "MIT",
  "ignore": [
    "**/.*",
    "node_modules",
    "bower_components",
    "test",
    "tests"
  ],
  "dependencies": {
    "jquery": "^3.1.0"
  }
}

```
The most important part for us are the dependencies. These are the packages that our project depends on. And these are the ones that bower will install. You can see that we have jQuery version 3.1.0.

Let's get bower to read the manifest and install what we need. Make sure you are in the same directory as the bower.json and type the following in to your terminal.

```javascript
bower install
```

Bower will download all the packages you need and place them in the bower_components directory. If you look in there now you will see jQuery.

You may ask why the bower_components directory wasn't included in the starter code. We never want to keep copies of packages in our own git repository. We only ever store the manifest file. That way we always get up to date versions of the packages when we need them. So the bower_components directory is excluded from git repos by default.

***

## Using bower packages

Using the packages is just like using any other code. You include it with a script or link tag ( some packages have CSS, javascript, html etc ). 

Have a look at the index.html and you will see how jquery has been included from the bower_components directory.

Bower packages do not all have to have the same file structure so you may need to read the documentation for the package to see which files to include.

## Installing packages

So we've installed all the packages that were already in our manifest but what if we want to install something new. That's just as easy.

Let's try installing bootstrap. Bootstrap is a CSS framework. In the terminal, in your starter code directory, type the following:

```javascript
bower install bootstrap
```

If you look in the bower_components directory you should now see bootstrap in there. However, have a look in the bower.json. You should see that bootstrap has not been added to our dependencies!

This means that if we were to put this code in to git and share it with people they would be missing a dependency, bootstrap.

We can get bower to save our dependencies to the manifest by adding a flag to the install command.

Type the following:

```javascript
bower install bootstrap --save
```

This will reinstall bootstrap but also save it in the bower.json. Make sure you use --save from now on when you install new packages.

We have only scratched the surface of what bower can do but these few commands are what you will use the most.
 
## Summary

You just:

*  installed bower
*  used bower to read a manifest and install the packages
*  install some new packages and saved them to manifest
*  learned that we don't save packages in git. Just the manifest.









 

















